SCREEN PLOTS
======================================================

LOG (ChiSq) vs. iteration number

This plot will appear after the second iteration of the MaxEnt
routine.  If the ChiSquared is nearly constant for 3 or more
consecutive iterations, this plot will not appear.  The "===="
bar in the plot indicates the target value of "N", the number
of intensity points.


Entropy vs. iteration number

This plot will appear for every iteration after the second.
The "====" bar in the plot indicates the entropy of a flat
distribution with the same number of diametral bins as have
been specified.


Residuals

The standardized residuals are the difference between the
intensity that is calculated from the distribution and the
input intensity, all divided by the input error.  For the
model to fit the data well, this plot should look featureless
(a.k.a. random).  The "====" bars are at +1 and -1 standard
deviations.  67% of the points should fit within the bars.  If
there is some systematic difference beween the model and the
data, the residuals will reveal it by showing some shape.


Distribution

The distribution plot appears at the end of each iteration and
shows the most recent distribution, whose calculated intensity
is to be compared with the input intensity and errors.  The
values in this plot are weighted (multiplied) by the bin
width.  This means that when the bins are distributed in a
geometric series, it will be quite difficult for the user to
see a small peak at smaller diameters in this plot.  Have no
fear though because this method weights the volume fraction in
a manner equal to that of the algebraic series.


Volume weighted size dist.: V(r)N(r) versus r

Once the MaxEnt routine has decided that it has a solution,
this plot will appear. The vertical scale is the volume
distribution (technically the "volume-weighted differential
number distribution").  This is almost the same value as was
plotted in the "Distribution" plot except the bin width has
been divided out.  The horizontal scale is a linear axis on
which is plotted particle radii.

.. note::  The
	MaxEnt routine does its work with respect to
	particle radii.  All answers are properly scaled to diametral
	units in the output files. Additionally, the MaxEnt routine
	works with intensities in 1/m units.  It seems to do some bad
	things when the intensities are in 1/cm.  The FORTRAN code
	isolates the user from this eccentricacy.  All unit
	conversions are corrected in the output data.
